Open Governance Model (#4743)
ECP-WarpX/WarpX: GOVERNANCE.rst

.. _governance:

WarpX Governance
================

WarpX is led in an open governance model, described in this file.

Steering Committee
------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Jean-Luc Vay (chair)
- Remi Lehe
- Axel Huebl

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-admins>`__

Role
^^^^

> The steering committee (SC) can change repo requirements, can do administrative operations such as rename/move/archive projects, etc.

Reviewer: The term `repo requirements` may need to be clarified/defined.

Author: - GitHub organization administration
- repository settings
- branch protection rules
```suggestion
The steering committee (SC) can change organizational settings, do administrative operations such as rename/move/archive repositories, change branch protection rules, etc.
```

> SC members call votes for decisions.

Reviewer: Do you mean "can call for a vote"?

Reviewer: Also, here, does "decisions" refer to governance-related decision, or technical decisions?

Author: ```suggestion
SC members can call votes for decisions (technical of governance).
```

The SC can veto decisions of the technical committee (TC) by voting in the SC.

The SC can change the governance structure, but only in an unanimous vote.

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Decision are made in a public, majority vote of SC members.

Reviewer: Do we need to specify how members will be notified of a vote (e.g. one week in advance email notice), and the voting procedure (e.g. Zoom meeting, or email)?

Author: Good questions, we tried to keep procedure slick for now but for the SC a bit more structure due to its weight might be useful. Maybe the simplest thing is: everyone in the SC has like 1-2 weeks to vote if a vote is called.

```suggestion
Decision are made in a non-confidential, majority vote of SC members.
```

In tie situations, the chair of the SC acts as the tie breaker.

Appointment Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Appointed by current SC members in an unanimous vote.

SC members can resign or be removed by majority vote, e.g., due to inactivity, bad acting or other reason.

Technical Committee
-------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Luca Fedeli
- Roelof Groenwald
- David Grote
- Axel Huebl
- Revathi Jambunathan
- Remi Lehe
- Andrew Myers
- Maxence Thévenet
- Weiqun Zhang
- Edoardo Zoni

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-push-merge-write>`__

Role
^^^^

The technical committee (TC) is the core governance body, where under normal operations most ideas are discussed and decisions are made.
Individual TC members can approve and merge code changes.
Usually, they seek approval by another maintainer for their own changes, too.

> TC members lead and weight in on technical discussions and can call a vote between TC members, if needed for a technical decision.

Author: ```suggestion
TC members lead - and weigh in on - technical discussions and, if needed, can call for a vote between TC members for a technical decision.
```

TC members merge/close PRs and issues, and moderate (including block/mute) bad actors.
The TC can propose governance changes to the SC.

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Discussion on a topic in the weekly developer meetings.

Author: ```suggestion
Discussion in the TC usually happens in the weekly developer meetings.
```

> If someone calls for a vote to make a decision: majority based on the passed votes; we need 50% of the committee participating to vote. In the absence of a quorum, the SC will decide.

Author: ```suggestion
If someone calls for a vote to make a decision: majority based on the cast votes; we need 50% of the committee participating to vote. In the absence of a quorum, the SC will decide according to its voting rules.
```

> Decision are made in a public, majority vote of TC members.

Author: ```suggestion
Votes are cast in non-confidential manner.
```

> In the absence of a quorum (>50%) in the TC, the SC decides according to its voting rules.
> 

Author: Duplicate.
```suggestion
```

> TC members can individually highlight  new contributors, unless a vote is called on an individual.

Author: ```suggestion
TC members can individually appoint new contributors, unless a vote is called on an individual.
```

Appointment Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TC members are the maintainers of WarpX.
As a TC member, regularly attending and contributing to the weekly developer meetings is expected.

> One is appointed to the TC by the steering committee, in an unanimous vote.

Author: ```suggestion
One is appointed to the TC by the steering committee, in a unanimous vote, or by majority vote of the TC. The SC can veto appointments.
```

Steering committee members can also be TC members.

TC members can resign or be removed by majority vote by either TC or SC, e.g., due to inactivity, bad acting or other reason.

Contributors
------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-contributors>`__

Role
^^^^

> Contributors are valuable, vetted developers to WarpX.

Author: ```suggestion
Contributors are valuable, vetted developers of WarpX.
```

Contributions can be in many forms and not all need to be code contributions.

> Examples include code pull requests, support in issues & user discussions, writing and updating documentation, R&D on novel numerics, testing and benchmarking, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
Examples include code pull requests, support in issues & user discussions, writing and updating documentation, writing tutorials, visualizations, R&D on algorithms, testing and benchmarking, etc.
```

> Contributors can participate in developer meetings and weight in on discussions.

Author: ```suggestion
Contributors can participate in developer meetings and weigh in on discussions.
```

Contributors can "triage" (add labels) to pull requests, issues, and GitHub discussion pages.
Contributors can comment and review PRs (but not merge).

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Contributors can individually decide on classification (triage) of pull requests, issues, and GitHub discussion pages.

Appointment Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Appointed after contributing to WarpX (see above) by any member of the TC.

> The role can be lost by resigning or majority vote by TC or SC due to inactivity, bad acting or other.

Author: ```suggestion
The role can be lost by resigning or by decision of an individual TC or SC member, e.g., due to inactivity, bad acting or other.
```

.. _governance:

WarpX Governance
================

WarpX is led in an open governance model, described in this file.

Steering Committee
------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Jean-Luc Vay (chair)
- Remi Lehe
- Axel Huebl

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-admins>`__

Role
^^^^

> The steering committee (SC) can change organizational settings, do administrative operations such as rename/move/archive repositories, change branch protection rules, etc.

Author: Clarified per discussion:
```suggestion
Members of the steering committee (SC) can change organizational settings, do administrative operations such as rename/move/archive repositories, change branch protection rules, etc.
```
SC members can change branch protection rules, etc. as needed for daily administrative work (e.g., CI).

SC members can call votes for decisions (technical or governance).

> The SC can veto decisions of the technical committee (TC) by voting in the SC.

Author: Suggestion from feedback to add more trust to the TC:
```suggestion
The SC can veto decisions of the technical committee (TC) by voting in the SC.
The TC can overwrite a veto with a 2/3rd majority vote in the TC.
```

Author: Approved today by @WeiqunZhang @atmyers @RemiLehe in meeting.

Author: Ok'd also by @jlvay via Slack.

The SC can change the governance structure, but only in a unanimous vote.

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Decision of the SC usually happen in the weekly developer meetings, via e-mail or public chat.

Decisions are made in a non-confidential manner, by majority on the cast votes of SC members.
Votes can be cast in asynchronous manner, e.g., over the time of 1-2 weeks.
In tie situations, the chair of the SC acts as the tie breaker.

Appointment Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Appointed by current SC members in an unanimous vote.
As a SC member, regularly attending and contributing to the weekly developer meetings is expected.

SC members can resign or be removed by majority vote, e.g., due to inactivity, bad acting or other reasons.

Technical Committee
-------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Luca Fedeli

> - Roelof Groenwald

Reviewer 2: 😄 
```suggestion
- Roelof Groenewald
```

Author: Ooops! Sorry :)

Reviewer 2: No worries! Thanks for updating.

.. _governance:

WarpX Governance
================

WarpX is led in an open governance model, described in this file.

Steering Committee
------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Jean-Luc Vay (chair)
- Remi Lehe
- Axel Huebl

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-admins>`__

Role
^^^^

Members of the steering committee (SC) can change organizational settings, do administrative operations such as rename/move/archive repositories, change branch protection rules, etc.
SC members can call votes for decisions (technical or governance).

The SC can veto decisions of the technical committee (TC) by voting in the SC.

> The TC can overwrite a veto with a 2/3rd majority vote in the TC.

Author: Here and in TC add:
```suggestion
The TC can overwrite a veto with a 2/3rd majority vote in the TC.
Decisions are documented in the `weekly developer meeting notes <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eYD8EYCYDI0H7FhiiEuRUDJZ5pPDr6MUL-IibE-Pk50/edit>`__ and/or on the GitHub repository.
```

Technical Committee
-------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Luca Fedeli
- Roelof Groenewald
- David Grote
- Axel Huebl
- Revathi Jambunathan
- Remi Lehe
- Andrew Myers
- Maxence Thévenet
- Weiqun Zhang
- Edoardo Zoni

See: `GitHub team <https://github.com/orgs/ECP-WarpX/teams/warpx-push-merge-write>`__

Role
^^^^

The technical committee (TC) is the core governance body, where under normal operations most ideas are discussed and decisions are made.
Individual TC members can approve and merge code changes.
Usually, they seek approval by another maintainer for their own changes, too.
TC members lead - and weigh in on - technical discussions and, if needed, can call for a vote between TC members for a technical decision.
TC members merge/close PRs and issues, and moderate (including block/mute) bad actors.
The TC can propose governance changes to the SC.

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Discussion in the TC usually happens in the weekly developer meetings.

If someone calls for a vote to make a decision: majority based on the cast votes; we need 50% of the committee participating to vote. In the absence of a quorum, the SC will decide according to its voting rules.

> Votes are cast in a non-confidential manner.

Author: ```suggestion
Votes are cast in a non-confidential manner.
Decisions are documented in the `weekly developer meeting notes <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eYD8EYCYDI0H7FhiiEuRUDJZ5pPDr6MUL-IibE-Pk50/edit>`__ and/or on the GitHub repository.
```

Decisions are documented in the `weekly developer meeting notes <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eYD8EYCYDI0H7FhiiEuRUDJZ5pPDr6MUL-IibE-Pk50/edit>`__ and/or on the GitHub repository.

The SC can change the governance structure, but only in a unanimous vote.

Decision Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Decision of the SC usually happen in the weekly developer meetings, via e-mail or public chat.

Decisions are made in a non-confidential manner, by majority on the cast votes of SC members.
Votes can be cast in asynchronous manner, e.g., over the time of 1-2 weeks.
In tie situations, the chair of the SC acts as the tie breaker.

Appointment Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Appointed by current SC members in an unanimous vote.
As a SC member, regularly attending and contributing to the weekly developer meetings is expected.

SC members can resign or be removed by majority vote, e.g., due to inactivity, bad acting or other reasons.

Technical Committee
-------------------

Current Roster
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Luca Fedeli
- Roelof Groenewald
- David Grote
- Axel Huebl
- Revathi Jambunathan
- Remi Lehe
- Andrew Myers
- Maxence Thévenet

> - Weiqun Zhang

Author: Added after review from @jlvay and @AlexanderSinn :
```suggestion
- Jean-Luc Vay
- Weiqun Zhang
```
